Hello, everybody. Welcome to a new episode of the
Decent. I'm your host as always Ricardo Loops. And
today I'm joined by Doctor Honorata Maus. She is
associate professor in the Political Science Department at the
University of Amsterdam. And today we're talking about topics
like democracy, the election win or lose or gap,
citizen support for democratic checks and balances, civil society,
political legitimacy and some other related topics. So Dr
Mazu, welcome to the show. It's a pleasure to
everyone.
Thank you for having me.
So let's start here with uh democracy. So from
the perspective of political science, what is democracy exactly?
And how do you go about classifying particular political
systems as democratic or nondemocratic?
We start with a really, really big question that
could take probably an entire interview in itself. Um
So let's let's open this Pandora box. Um So
of course, there is uh an incredibly huge amount
of scholarship trying to classify categorize political regimes and
to find out what makes a democracy. Uh And
I think the most basic distinction that we can
make in these definitions of democracies of democracy is
whether we stick to some kind of minimalist. Uh
DEFINITION, which would be it's the rule by the
people. And then usually we end up with uh
some sort of um a criterion about electoral procedures,
right? So you have to have elections. So that
regime is called democracy. Uh And then there are
the more extended uh broader definitions of democracy that
also add additional criteria which would be criteria such
as checks and balances. So for example, the freedom
of the media, the role of the citizens in
opposition pluralism. So all these extra elements uh would
then lead to an extended version of uh extended
definition of democracy. And by many scholars that would
already be called a liberal democracy. So adding this
extra criteria would mean that we are ending up
with liberal democracy. Now, the question is, can you
have just purely uh electoral democracy without any of
this additional criteria? And I think this is where
we are now also looking at the political world
struggling a little bit because the question is, is
it just the rule of majority that we are
ending up with when we just stick to this
uh rule of? Oh yeah, the winners of the
elections have the right to rule and then the
majority is entitled to basically uh propose and execute
policies, right? Um So without any additional constraints, can
this be called a democracy but purely Demos, Kratos,
it would be the rule by the people.
Mhm Yeah, this is very interesting because I I
mean, I guess that we could say and I,
you mentioned that briefly there that there's not just
one single kind of democracy or possible democratic regime.
Uh AND there's also different levels of democracy, right?
Because there are many different facts, facts that political
scientists and other uh scholars and even politicians, international
organizations look into to classify, for example, uh how
much democracy there really is in particular countries. And
I guess that another important thing that you mentioned
there is that we usually tend to associate democracy
with the rule of the majority. But I guess
that nowadays, at least we also care a lot
about uh the rights of minorities of minor groups,
also the their rights and interests also being respected,
right? And that also counts as I guess uh
democratic or not
or liberal. So that's exactly the discussion that we
are having, right? So where, where are these boundaries?
And can we have one without the other? And
of course, uh you know, just total limitation of
democracy to elections is um we can bring it
to the absurdity even because you can think about
having elections in um let's say old authoritarian communist
systems where they were meaningless because you just had
one party and that party could not lose. So
just having elections obviously is not enough to establish
a democratic rule, right? You would not call the
Soviet Union and a democratic regime just because they
organized elections. So here we come with the criteria
that are also coming from the, the classic uh
literature like dao's uh criteria of pluralism and contestation.
So you have to have at least some actors
that are competing in elections, some political parties that
are fighting for power. And it has to be
possible to uh to contest one another, right? So
it cannot be that just uh the Communist Party
always wins and nobody can criticize it. Um So
already within this electoral uh definition, there are extra
criteria that are being added to make it a
democracy. And then there is of course, this classical
dilemma of uh of the tyranny of the majority,
right? So uh what you mentioned uh who is
the majority or who is actually the people who
are supposed to rule? And is it all the
citizens of the country or is it just the
majority that at a particular moment prevails in elections?
Right? And what do we do then about the
rights of the minorities? And this usually comes under
the definition of liberal democracy. So how do we
treat those who don't necessarily win the elections? And
it becomes increasingly complicated in more diverse societies of
nowadays, right? When you have multiple groups coming together.
So if you think about how we used to
live as humans in our small scale communities, the
diversity was very limited, right? So uh basically the
will of the majority would represent almost everybody. Uh
And it was also much easier to check uh
whether the uh the, the powerful actually violate the
rights of the minority would be maybe, I don't
know, 10 people out of 50 right. Uh And
nowadays, this becomes very complicated and intricate in the
diverse societies. But also you can see that um
because of that we have this gradation of uh
you know, democratic of different political systems and that
some systems perform maybe better in terms of including
those minorities in the governing and some perform a
bit worse. So to give you an example, I
live now in the Netherlands, uh I come from
Poland, so I can at least compare from my
own experience. But also as political science, how these
systems perform in the Netherlands, you never have a
majority government. The pluralism is so high in terms
of the political, political game and political actors that
are competing, that it is impossible to rule just
with one party. Uh And this is not the
case in, for example, Poland with you can have
uh a majority government, right? Which means that in
the Netherlands, you always automatically include uh actors that
are actually minority actors in the governing process. So
even small parties that don't get a lot of
votes have always a chance to end up in
a governing coalition just because the system allows it,
right? And there is, first of all, there is
no threshold for getting into the parliament and second
of all, you have so many parties that actually
collect votes that you cannot rule with just one
party. So you always have to build a consensus.
This can have also disadvantages, of course, in terms
of policy making. But when you think about uh
potential extreme policies that can come with the majority
rule, they are kind of eliminated. And these are
usually the dangers of having one political party, majoritarian
party come to power uh because they can exclude
them, the minorities from, you know, the decisions and
even harm them, right? So because of that, well,
different political systems will perform differently, although they might
be in principle still called All Democratic.
Mhm. And by the way, I think this is
a very important point to drive home because many
times when people think about democracies, we focus mostly,
I guess on uh everyone, everyone being able to
vote there is if there's universal suffrage there, right?
But uh I mean, democracy is much more than
just being given to vote in elections. It's also
uh many other kinds of political participation that you
are allowed to have, right? Like for example, uh
having the right to protest uh participate in manifestations
if you disagree with certain political decisions or if
you want to uh the demand and certain political
rights, for example, having a right to uh hunger
strike or something like that, having the right when
it comes to labor rights to create labor unions.
And so there, there's a bunch of ways of
participating in politics that uh must be granted for
them to be democratic.
Right. Yes. And I think this is also something
that distinguishes. Uh MAYBE this is, I don't know
if it's still an appropriate term but more mature
democracies from, let's say democracies in making that you
have many more uh permitted but also stimulated uh
ways to actually participate in this democratic uh socio
economic or social political sphere, right? So there is
very little that is forbidden apart from, you know,
like the the usual regulations, regulatory state that we
have. Uh And there is a lot of scope
for expressing either your interests or your preferences or
disappointment. Uh AS you say, associational life is a
part of it, right? Uh But also uh the
institutions that are not state institutions such as the
media play a very important role there, right? And
if you compare the democratic regimes with uh non
democratic regimes, you see that the media space is
much more pluralistic in uh mature democracies than in
uh you know, constrained environments of either new democracies
or uh or authoritarian regimes. At the moment when
uh an authoritarian regime falls, suddenly you get this
chaos of info of information, right? That was suppressed
for a long time because only particular information was
allowed to uh uh you know, uh uh the
fill in, let's say the informational space. And once
that constraint is over, then you see new information
that was probably there but suppressed coming out. And
then you, you have this moment of uh yeah,
uh kind of new, new ways of thinking being
allowed and being voiced also in the public space.
Um And this also then structures in the end,
the media environment in this uh democratizing situation, sometimes
it leads to the step towards either you know,
developed or consolidated democracies as it's called in the
literature. Sometimes it is again suppressed by the actors
that uh start to overtake and dominate that information
space. And then that comes like with, for example,
in the case of Russia, which I studied for,
for a while, it comes with all kinds of
restrictions on the information space, but also the activities.
So what you were talking about, right, who is
allowed to create an association, which interests are going
to be present in the public space, um who
is gonna be called a foreign agent, for example,
rather than domestic uh NGO non governmental organization, right?
So uh this is what distinguishes really this democratic
space, public space or socio, political, socio economic space
from uh authoritarian space.
Mhm A and by the way, another as another
very important aspect here that I think you've alluded
to there briefly is has to do with just
generally speaking, freedom of expression, right? Freedom of the
press, the freedom of expression for individual citizens and
also the ability to uh manifest political opinions, criticize
the government without suffering any political economic uh labor
consequences. I mean, without getting fired, for example, without
being put into jail or uh legally persecuted in
some way.
Right. Exactly. Yes, it's about the freedom of expression,
freedom to or the right to protest the right
to associate and these associations do not necessarily have
to exactly align with, let's say the political color
of the government, right? Uh So this is all
that. Uh YEAH, it also seems, let's say the
most intuitive aspect of democracy. So voting is one
thing but the other thing is this freedom to
criticize and contest those who are in government by
expressing, you know, your opposition, but also expressing your
interest that might be overlooked by that government, right?
Or just even your existence if we are talking
about some minority groups uh and their um their
livelihoods.
Mhm. But when it comes to the so-called rule
of the majority, I mean, as we mentioned before,
but I'm going to stress it uh again now,
uh it might be in particular context, at least
a little bit problematic because of course, in democracy,
in human society, more generally, we have people with
different kinds of, of interests and of course, they
want to push for their own interests as individuals
or groups politically. That's just how things work. But
sometimes uh majority uh if uh a particular ma
majority is interested in oppressing uh minority groups that
can also happen. And also I if a, if
a particular majority of people are interested in that
specifically, they might be able to politically overturn democracy
if they prefer, for example, an autocratic system and
vote uh f for a political party that serves
those particular kinds of interests.
Yes, definitely. And this is now considered a problem,
not only of the new democracies or those countries
that for some reason, they are still called new
democracies, but they democratized, democratized already in the 19
nineties, right? So at some point, maybe they are
not so new anymore, but it is all encompassed
under the term of uh democratic backsliding. So basically,
countries that have reached uh mature uh consolidated democracy
and that after um a party that has maybe
not so democratic tendencies comes to power and has
the majority in the government. And in the parliament
takes steps towards actually decreasing all these checks and
balances that we have uh in the political system
to control their power, right? As citizens. Uh And
this is exactly the the problem that we are
struggling with now. And we also see that uh
more and more we have uh uh a scientific
consensus that it is not just a problem of
new democracies that this can happen anywhere, right? That
uh even in the oldest democracies that we have,
which are still not that old, by the way,
our Democratic history is not so long. Uh But
even in these oldest democracies like the US, it
can happen that you have uh within a party
or uh within particular sections of a party trends
towards decreasing democracy. And if that party wins, then
it seems like we are in trouble, right? So,
of course, I'm alluding now also to the, to
the win of Donald Trump and then particular powers
within the Republican Party that uh you know, they
cared a little bit less about the uh uh
the independence of courts. Uh Another aspect that is
happening and this is not just limited to Trump's
government, but in the US, for example, it's a
very common thing to interfere with uh the electoral
boundaries of uh which is called gerrymandering, right of
the precincts within which voting is happening so that
we can skew the elections in a particular way.
So this kind of trends can happen and it
can happen exactly when the majority is given to
uh to particular political options that maybe do not
care about democracy so much. And that was also
the case in the uh uh in Poland, when
the law and justice came to power, they started
interfering in different ways with the checks and balances.
So the judicial system, but also then uh the
media space suddenly uh was uh being limited. So
the public broadcaster has been pretty much taken over
by the government and became something like a propaganda
propaganda to for the governing party which you know,
in democracies, this is not what public TV should
be at least normative, right. Um And also the
limitations of rights of women were uh in the
end imposed by that party. So, you know, step
by step, starting with the judicial reform, but also
the moving to the information space and then in
the end to this uh citizens rights, I wouldn't
call it minority rights because women are a majority.
But uh let's say more vulnerable uh people's rights
uh limitations uh as basically uh uh a move
towards uh grab of power. So executive power of
the party that is in charge. So that's exactly
what you are saying, right, that majority uh rule
does not necessarily always mean that we increase democratic
uh of our political systems.
By the way, there's uh something very interesting that
you mentioned there that is basically that democracy, at
least as we understand it today is a very
recent political phenomenon uh historically because uh sometimes uh
we talk about, for example, democracy in Ancient Greece
in Athens specifically. But if we go into the
details, uh I mean, it's very different from the
kinds of particularly liberal democracies that we are used
to today because even back then, and this is
just one aspect of it, there were others but
apart from uh them having slavery, uh it also
the people were considered citizens and could participate politically
and, and it was basically almost just an elite
of people right? And so ju just those two
aspects and there were others, of course, makes it
very different from the kind of democracy that we
tend to think about today. Right?
Yeah. So it's yes and no in terms of
uh uh being a recent phenomenon. So in, in
terms of the institutional shape of democracy that we
have, yes, it's a new, new thing, right? So
if we think about this large scale remote actually
institutions that are operating, uh This is something newer
constitutions are something that is new, for example. So
they start in Europe in the US, in the
18th century, right? The ideas of course, are not
so new as you say already, the uh you
know, the idea about how to take decisions uh
about uh some kind of consensus building. This is
all this has been there and you mentioned the
ancient Greece and you know, the city state systems.
But if you think about it, actually our uh
communities from our evolutionary perspective, they were more democratic
than not, right? Not in the institutional sense, but
in terms of how they were deciding about uh
their, their uh well, ho how they were making
decisions about the most important issues uh that they
were facing back then.
Uh BASICALLY all they would run their societies even
if they were smaller scale.
Yes. So in uh this is still a very
preliminary research, but I also base it on the
research of others that has been done uh with
the anthropological records. Uh What we can see is
that the anti domination uh intuition in the small
scale communities was very strong, right? So, of course,
it varied a little bit because you had communities
that face different challenges. Um But if you think
about the most common trends, they were very vigilant
of being dominated by the leaders and the decisions
were taken communally. Of course, it was much easier
because you had smaller communities. So basically, everybody knew
each other, everybody knew what the intentions of the
other persons are and they could easily control.
Uh Let me just ask you just to clarify,
uh you're referring there to traditional societies, like for
example, hunter gatherers, horticulturalists, pastoralists.
So I looked in this particular study, we look
only at hunter gatherer societies and these are, these
are anthropological records. So they're based on ethnography. So
these are not, you know, our societies as uh
thousands and thousands of years ago uh throughout our
evolution, but they are the best proxies, I guess
we have uh in terms of how this small
scale face to face communities operated. So this is,
this is what I'm talking about. Um And in
this project, we look at how the communities contested
their leaders and their decisions uh and when they
wanted to grant more power to them, right? So
exactly this idea of when we delegate power and
when we want to constrain it to find out
what kind of basic intuitions we have and maybe
then think about, OK, which of these checks and
balances that we have in terms of large institutions
nowadays um are more intuitive and which ones maybe
people care the most about. Uh BECAUSE in the
end, there is not so much backlash against democratic
backsliding as you would expect if you would think,
OK, we have this strong anti domination uh intuition.
But then, you know, when this particular authoritarian party
comes to power, why don't we act as citizens?
Why don't we have this drive to actually do
something about it and prevent them from uh constraining
our freedom?
Mhm No, I it it's very good that you
clarified that because uh what I mentioned, I was
not thinking or considering at all smaller scale societies.
I mean, I've already had tons of anthropologists on
the show, but in this particular case, I was
not thinking about them specifically. Uh BUT I was
perhaps thinking more about larger scale societies with perhaps
hundreds of thousands, millions of people participating in them.
Uh And I was also perhaps considering the fact
that uh democracy risk or at least recent democracies.
I mean, uh it was a process to get
there. It was not just for example, that uh
the US got their independence or there was for
example, the French revolution and the Institute of the
Republic there and then suddenly overnight anyone can, could
vote anyone could participate politically. It was a process,
I mean, not only for the vast majority of
citizens, including in the early stages, the vast majority
of men, but also women and particular minority races
and other people like that.
Of course, it was a struggle for suffrage rights,
right? And maybe we could uh use the 18th
century mark or 18th 19th century mark as this
moment when uh suffrage rights expansion was something that
was happening. Although, you know, even some European countries
uh such as Switzerland were very, very late in
the 20th century to introduce suffrage rights for women.
Uh But the 18th century when, when that starts,
and that's also the process that um included a
lot of deliberation among the elites uh about what
happens. And this comes from my research with a
historian actually. So what happens when we give the
suffrage rights to this uneducated masses, right? So that's
where the discussion about the populism uh and the
populist mob or the manipulation of the masses already
starts. So this is the 18th century when we
are developing uh our uh democratic checks and balances.
So some say that this three politic and democratic
checks and balances are introduced exactly to control the
power of the mob or the potential of manipulation
of the masses by the populists. So by some,
this is also seen as a very elitist move
right to actually constrain the influence of uh of
the people on the other hand, of course, you
also have to consider. Um YEAH, how do we
want our decisions to be made? Right. So you
can decide majority is always right. But you can
also decide, well, there are situations where merit. So
actually knowing things about the issue at stake is
very important. And the further we get with our
technological development, the more um no complex the issues
that the states are dealing with we have and
therefore perhaps the role of uh merit and knowledge
and maybe even technocracy increased over time as well.
Right? So we had this or, or we could
talk about some sin. So it's sometimes it is
uh you know, it is going up how much
technocracy we have and sometimes we go back to
this uh majority rule and the will of the
people and this kind of rhetoric in our political
systems.
And by the way, we're going to get more
into checks, democratic checks and balances. But I guess
that uh when people think about them, they usually
think about checks and balances for politicians just for
politicians to not abuse the the power they are
granted by the people, so to speak. But uh
there's also, I guess some checks and balances that
the political system itself tries to keep. Like for
example, there might be certain instances where if we
add uh just a general vote, perhaps a majority
of people would vote against the rights of particular
minority groups, but that's just not allowed politically. Right.
Well, yes, hopefully. So, you know,
I was just, I was just saying that, um,
sometimes at least, uh, those checks and balances are
also there against even the will or the possible
will of a majority.
Yes. So that's, that's exactly why we have them.
Uh, WE have courts, right. Also that control, uh,
whether the democratic, civic rights of citizens, uh, are
being complied with by the government and also other
actors in society. Um And yeah, another thing about
this, um yeah, how do, how do elites actually
act out upon the rules? I think that's, that's
an important issue. And this is uh uh perhaps
you're familiar with this book by uh Levitsky in
the way and they actually uh look at the
American political system and their argument is that what
went wrong in the recent uh electoral waves in
uh or after the recent elections uh in the
US when Trump won the elections was that the
elites actually failed in preventing the, the power grab
by that one particular leader who had non democratic
intentions. Uh So they point to not only the,
the kind of formal rules or institutional um institutional
constraints, but they point out that the elites themselves
are also responsible for what they do and whom
they encourage and you know what they allow. Uh
And this is maybe more in the territory of
informal rules and then thinking about, OK, given we,
we care about the rights of citizens or assuming
we care about the rights of citizens. We should
not allow such a politician to represent our party,
for example. Right. That, that's the 1st, 1st step
if we know they are non democratic and we
are Democrats, which Republicans would, would claim they are
obviously. Right. Um I think actually in, uh not
even in the authoritarian regimes, the leaders would claim
that they're authoritarian, they would always claim that they're
democratic. That's, that's another, they
are for the interests of the people,
at least. Exactly. So they would use that, that
side of the definition of democracy, of course to
justify uh the rule. But going back to the
elites is that, um, we have the citizens and
they are in my view, they are crucial as
well in what happens uh in the political realm
of their own country. But we have the elites
who can also take choices that lead either to
the development of democracy or sustaining of democracy or
deterioration of democracy.
Yeah, I, I mean, that's something that we hear
frequently. I, I don't think that there's any dictator
historically or presently out there that ever said that
although I'm only here for my own interests, they
also claim that they are, uh for, uh, they're
fighting for the interests of the people, the will
of the people or something like that or the
nation. I mean, that if they would just say,
oh, no, I, I'm just here to, uh, take
advantage of my own citizens. I guess that they
would probably not last long in their position.
And these are exactly the legitimation strategies. Right. So
why do I have the right to rule? It's,
uh, you know, as an authoritarian leader, I would
never say it's because I want to dominate you
all. And I wanna grab as much power and
as much resources as I can. No, this is
not gonna work. So to be recognized as a
legitimate leader, you have to convince people that you
are actually doing something that is uh um en
enhancing their well being and the will of the
people is one of the arguments again, a very
misguided because what does that mean? Right, there is
no one will of the people ever, even if
you have a homogeneous society, you will have competing
interests. This is just just the way things work.
And Ben An has an uh excellent uh a
broad audience book that came out recently, why politics
fail? And he discusses extensively this idea of, you
know, the will of the people and the misconception
we have that about that. And that actually you
can never have the will of the people. It's
just not possible, it's how you handle the conflicts
in society that actually shows uh how mature you
are as democratic society, right?
And by the way, let me get into a
very specific topic that perhaps we've already ended up
touching slightly on in our conversation here. But in
your work, for example, you explore the election winner
loser gap. So what is that exactly?
Uh THE winner loser gap in terms of um
responses to the electoral result um implies that there
are differences in how the winners and losers of
uh elections think or perceive uh the political system
and the political reality more broadly. But also in
the end, how they perceive their own place in
that system, right? So that's, yeah, that I think
that's in short, how you can um you can
specify it. Uh And the research there started uh
with, by, by just looking at whether the winners
and losers of elections are to the same extent
satisfied with democracy. And the gap means that no,
there is a difference between them, right? They, they,
they are not the same satisfied with democracy, they
express uh lower satisfaction if they lose elections and
they express higher satisfaction when they win elections.
So there's a connection to subjective well being here,
right?
So that's uh that's one of the uh endeavors,
let's say of this research that we started with
Dimiter Toshkov, who is at the University of uh
Leiden. Um BECAUSE I focused first, so maybe let's
start with, with the, the first part uh about
democracy and then move to the well being. So
uh I started with thinking about the specific elements
of democracy so what we discussed, right, elections, but
also all these checks and balances. So freedom of
the media, opposition rights, the right to protest. And
uh my idea coming also from political psychology was
that our coalitional psychology should steer us to pay
more attention or be uh more vigilant about the
violations of checks and balances when we lose elections.
Right? So we already had some indication that uh
maybe the winners of elections like elections more when
they win, right, obviously, but what happens then with
these other elements of uh of democracy? And that
was the 1st, 1st part of this uh study
that we conducted both with observational data with the
European Social Survey, but also with an experiment in
Ukraine where we tried to find out if you
win or lose elections. Does it affect how much
you care about the uh freedom of speech, the
right of opposition, the rights of opposition and uh
uh the media criticism against the government. And indeed,
we found consistently that um there is an effect
that when you lose, you care more about constraining
the power, which makes sense, right? These effects are
not necessarily huge but they are there. And this
also implies that our ideas about democracy or how
much we value it is not something stable, this
is something conditional depending on the environment in which
we are uh operating and that was the starting
point. But then we thought, OK, so um you
know, winning and losing elections. It's a little bit
like, like sports, like playing a game, but with
higher stakes and we have evidence from uh all
kinds of physiological studies, psychosomatic uh evaluations that people
respond uh physically to winning and losing, at least
in sports. But we also have evidence from uh
all kinds of coalition of winning and losing among
animals that show um that there should be some
effect on also well being or uh at least
in terms of stress hormones being released, right? So
how, how our body responds to winning and losing?
I said, well, let's see whether at least um
in terms of attitudinal responses, we find that uh
that effect. So we did not study the physiology
of winning and losing, but we studied the attitudes
of citizens. And indeed, we found out that when
you are losing elections, you feel less optimistic, um
You feel uh at least you evaluate your, your
health as worse than when you win elections. And
this was done also with observational data from the
European Social survey that that was conducted uh twice,
at least we looked at 22 data sets from
2012 and 2018. And this also allowed us to
have the shifts uh between the losers and winners,
right? So different parties were uh in charge in
2012 then in 2018. So the who was the
winner and who was the loser also changed there.
So we accounted for, for that in, in that
study design. Again, these effects are not huge, but
it shows that there is really something there uh
that we need to pay attention to in terms
of uh thinking about our values, uh democratic values,
right? And their stability. And then the, I don't,
I don't really like the word biases but, you
know, the biases that we have depending on which
side of the coalition we are. I don't think
there are really biases because it's justified to be
more worried when you lose. Right. Um, WELL, your
rights will be constrained at the moment that, uh,
the opponent wins, uh, or no, will suddenly you
have to watch out what you say when the
opponent, uh, the opponent wins. It's your job then,
uh, at stake, right? If you disagree with your
boss and, you know, he supports the, a particular
party or is connected to a particular party. So
I, I wouldn't call it a bias but then,
you know, the, um, yeah, how, how would you
call it? It's, it's not really a bias if
it's totally justified, but basically the shift. So, so
the, the responsiveness of these values that some thought
are maybe very stable add in the literature.
Mhm. Yeah, it's not a bias if it's totally
justified. I mean, that's, that's a very interesting point
be because I was actually going to ask you.
So, uh, at a certain point there, you mentioned
that if you are uh a loser, sometimes you
want more constraints on the political system, the political
power and perhaps that would sometimes imply constraints on
democracy or democratic processes. But uh I mean, uh
but particularly if you have particular interests in mind,
like for example, protecting the rights of certain groups
of people that after the democratic process are under
threat. For example, perhaps having that impulse to really
want some constraints on the established political power, even
if it's under a democratic regime might not be
that bad, right? When you want to protect perhaps
the rights of certain people and even sometimes not
necessarily just minorities, but even a majority of people
that might suddenly see their rights taken away or
reps being put under economic and social pressure depending
on the measures or the policies that the particular
political power party in power uh takes.
Yeah. So the losers want to contest the power
more. So they are actually supporting the checks and
balances more and you know, normative. Well, uh it
depends, right? If you think that uh we should
go for the liberal democracy, then normative, this is
the right thing to do to actually contest the
powerful if they're trying to harm uh particular groups
in society. Um Yeah, and of course, uh the
problem is then that if you get the majority
government that wants to eliminate or limit these constraints,
then you have a clash, right? So what you
see is uh maybe we should talk about some
kind of uh gradual development of the political regimes
then that uh when one path of uh influencing
the government or constraining the government is closed, another
one is being opened or when one right is
being uh limited, then you go for still the
things that are available in the public space, right?
So thinking about what happened in Poland with uh
at least in the first term of the Law
and Justice Party when they started constraining the rights
of women. Um WOMEN went out massively to protest
the protest, right was uh available. It was not
constrained yet, right? So they could use that civic
right to express their disagreement with the government. That
was actually something that worked unfortunately, only short term
because in the second term uh of rule, the
law and justice went further with constraining the women's
rights. But you can see that the women still
had the option, they took their rights and they
went out to protest, not only women, by the
way, uh men also supported their uh actions massively.
And then you have situations like in Russia where
coming out to protest at some point is no
longer possible, right? Because it is you put yourself
in really huge danger and then it's uh basically
your uh your assessment of uh your risk and
gains that you can get from actually taking that
action, right? Um So the, the longer we allow
the government to take the rights away and to
constrain the checks and balances, the less likely it
is that we will be able to pay the
cost of coming out and protesting and pay the
cost of actually opposing that government to the extent
that at some point it's just no longer even
considered, right, an option only by those who are,
I don't know either the bravest or have the
least to lose.
Mhm So we've already talked a little bit about
that here. But what are some of the main
factors that influence citizen support for democratic checks and
balances? And I read in your work for example,
about effects of partisanship and economic performance. So could
you tell us about that?
Yes, of course. So this is also again a
research that I do in the stream of other
research that has been done before, right? So I
build on, on some of the work that inspired
it. And one of the, the papers that I
was inspired by was a Matthew singer's paper that
who looks at the developments in Latin American countries.
And he observed that when the perceived performance of
economy by the government uh is being evaluated as,
as high. So the economy is doing well in
the eyes of citizens, then they are more likely
to grant more power to these governments. So basically
that means that they allow the government to uh
execute uh reforms that then increase the power of
that government. And it could be, you know, in
terms of uh presidential powers expansion uh or uh
limiting to what extent you have to care about
the parliament, right? That's one of the things that
you can imagine. Um So that was, that was
the thing that uh that inspired in my research,
which I also took further with experimental designs. And
here you see that the economy is uh is
the factor that he emphasized and also losing winning.
So whether you support the government or you do
not support the government. So uh no coalition of
thinking is what I derived from that. And they
are both very important and I indeed find uh
uh find evidence, both observational and uh experimental that
uh when the economy is performing well, then citizens
are a bit less vigilant. So they are uh
more OK with uh for example, constraining the independence
of courts, right? Um THEY are more willing to
give up this right to constrain the government and
similarly the losing, winning uh effect. So this is
what we just discussed. The coalition will effect is
that if you lose the elections, then you are
paying more attention to uh to the government and
what they do and you wanna keep this right
to constrain them. So you are, they are finding
those more important elements of democracy. Uh And yeah,
maybe one thing to, to follow up on that
is that this is also linked to. Um AT
least one of my studies shows some evidence of
that um that when we look at the opponent
introducing a particular reform, we see more malicious intentions
of that reform when it's about the checks and
balances. When it's about democracy, when we have a
person with whom we align, we have the party
rule that we like or the party that, you
know, we feel strongly attached to is in charge.
Then we are uh thinking that their intentions are
benign. And to give you an example when um
when you are facing this uh proposals of political
reforms or changes that the politicians want to introduce,
they can give you all kinds of reasons. And
as we discussed before, nobody will say that they
have an undemocratic reason behind it, right? They will
always say this is to do something good, something
positive. When uh there is a proposal for reform
of protest rights. For example, the common argument that
you can find by politicians is is to increase
the safety of citizens who doesn't like safety, right?
Then the opponents will say well, but this is
then limiting our possibility or making it more difficult
for us to come out to the street and
protest against you. So now as a citizen, you
are standing there and like, yeah, well, safety, good
reason uh having the right to protest. Good reason
who is proposing it. Ah my opponent. So probably
they are actually wanting to limit me, right. So
you see the, the, the malicious intention behind it
uh if you won the elections and this is
the party that you like, who is proposing. It's
like, oh, that's, that's a fair argument. Safety is
very important. Uh So you see the benign uh
intention behind that proposal or you are more likely
to see that. Now, there are also differences between
the supporters of different political parties. Uh So some,
you know, some just care less, some care more
about democracy. But in general, this effect holds for
everybody. Right. So if you are winning or losing,
it determines what kind of intentions you see behind
the proposals of the government.
Mhm So there's also two concepts here that I
would like to ask you about that probably play
a very important role in democracy and o other
political regimes by the way. But in the context
of political science, what is civil society? What does
it mean exactly?
I think that's another concept that we could discuss
for, for an hour or so, at least. Um
AND there is really a lot of scholarship that
um that tries to define it and tries to
also uh distill the effects of civil society on
democracy. But in general, uh civil civil society encompasses
all kinds of organizational associational life that is distinct
from politics and business. OK. Right. So this would
be all kinds of organizations or associations um that
uh bring together citizens for particular goals, but they
are not attempting to get power and they are
not just pushing lobbying for particular business interests. And
it can be really anything that goes under that
label. So that's why it's a very problematic concept.
Uh CON uh concept sometimes to, to think about
because it could be, you know, a circle of
uh village uh I don't know, knitting funds, right?
Or it could be actually uh uh an organization,
non governmental organization that monitors the transparency of decision
making that monitors the corruption levels. That could also
be uh um an NGO right, or a civil
society, non governmental organization. Uh And because of that
this uh organizations or this, this uh civil society
space can have either stronger or less strong effects
on democracy, right? So there are some that argue
that actually even this kind of network of citizens
that is not necessarily aimed at monitoring the politicians,
like, you know, uh people who have specific hobbies
or do sports together that even this is already
something that is uh creating a very valuable addition
to democracy because it creates interpersonal trust. So that
would be Putnam's argument, right? Uh Bowling alone when
we don't go anymore with our friends, the uh
the kind of fabric of our society disintegrates and
that has has a negative effect also then on
the institutional trust, for example, there are others who
argue that actually what matters is these organizations that
are strictly um targeting the political, the monitoring of
political institutions. Uh And this could be, as I
said, uh you know, anti corruption and monitoring or
human rights monitoring organizations. Um TO some extent, maybe
you could think of some that uh analyze. So,
so all kinds of think tanks that analyze uh
the merits of policies that are also checking the
politicians, right, if you have some complex scientific issue,
and then there is maybe a proposal that violates
the most recent findings or our established knowledge, scientific
knowledge, they could uh contest these decisions, for example,
right? So this would also fall under uh civil
society.
Mhm Yeah, it's very interesting that you mentioned at
a certain point there, for example, just the simple
fact that some people play sports together and how
that leads to interpersonal trust and it can have
certain political effects because I was also thinking that
uh I mean, on the one hand, there are,
for example, people that say or claim that everything
is political, which perhaps is a little bit exaggerated.
But uh on the one, on the other hand,
it points to a very important effect. I guess
that is uh probably many of the things that
we do in our lives, how we conduct ourselves,
how we interact with other people in society, even
though they might not have any direct political expression,
might translate uh politically or into political behaviors. And
for example, I guess that you mentioned uh interpersonal
trust and sports there, I guess that on the
other extreme, on the other end of the spectrum
in modern uh industrialized and post industrial society is
a very common phenomenon is for people to manifest
uh loneliness. And we, I think particularly in bigger
cities, a more atomized society which perhaps sometimes we
don't link that directly to political behaviors necessarily, but
that might have uh political effects. Uh Even if
it's just sometimes the fact that people might get
politically disengaged.
Yes, for sure. You are, you're completely right. And
there is really a lot that we still don't
know about the effect of um yeah, the move
of our lives online on, on the communities and
then how that affects in the end um you
know, our perception of what creates this clas, right?
So who are these, these people with whom we
are actually creating a political ecosystem? And uh yeah,
it starts with these communities and you, you can
think it's uh you know, a little bit outrageous,
how come a sports club can actually uh have
any effect on, on larger democracies on remote institutional
system, but it is about interacting with people. And
it also depends probably on the type of club
you are participating and how diverse that club is,
how large it is, what kind of network you
are creating. But imagine a running club. This is
what I am familiar with. I would in my
normal, you know, online uh day or day with
students who are also a very particular particular population.
I would not encounter this diversity of people as
I encounter in my running club, right? Even the
fact what kind of jobs they do is sometimes
to be surprised that all this exists and these
people, you know, have these problems, these people uh
you know, are engaged in this kind of activities.
So this creates already some kind of idea about
who we are a society and it creates bonds.
There is also the problem that you might have
uh this very homogeneous groups that have very specific
goals uh And they do not interact with others.
And here we, we come to or, or maybe
even an antagonistic towards others, right? Um And let's
say the online space has advantages and disadvantages in
creating groups. They can, they can introduce more pluralism,
but they can also create uh the idea that
these more extreme voices or more excluding voices are
uh more prevalent. So you find easier, these people
with extreme ideas just because there is a lot
of information, there is a lot of people that
you would never encounter in your real life there
and you can bond with them as well, right?
So this, this creates perhaps another uh yeah, another
impulse into this civil society space that we are
talking about. So I think we still don't know
exactly how the online spaces will uh in the
end affect both our interactions in these communities, um
the the offline communities, but also then uh how
they will steer um yeah, democratic engagement or maybe,
yeah, negative engagement. And to give you an example
from, again, the research that I did um in
the Post Soviet space and also in, in Russia.
Um WE, we have such a term as uncivil
society. Again, I am not sure whether this is
a fair uh fair term, fair concept. But uh
this usually refers to those organizations that are very
exclusive, that um engage citizens on the basis of
particular criteria like ethnicity um or values, you know,
for example, conservative orthodox church values uh and vision
of the world. So for example, this engagement with
the West uh as being the the evil influence
versus, you know, engagement with some kind of Slavic
Orthodox traditional base, right? So based on very exclusive
identity um that is present in these post Soviet
countries and this is referred to sometimes as uncivil
society, there are different reasons for that. One is
the the type of values that they promote and
these values can be attractive to people, right? Conservative
values, religious values. This is not something that again
is immediately normative uh wrong, they are not progressive
values. So then again, if you take a normative
stand, we should aim at improvement rather than uh
you know, living the way we are uh or
yeah, living in the state that we are in,
then it becomes a debate. But the purely normative
there doesn't have to be a judgment there. So
these organizations attract those kind of people. But then
the problem and I think that's why they are
often called uncivil is that they are very often
also stimulated by particular state actors. And then we
get into this territory, territory of, you know, can
they still be called civil society because they are
influenced and very often funded and also supported by
the state actors. And here um in this post
Soviet space, this is uh the influence of the
Russian state that promotes this kind of organizations that
then actually also promoted their values and their ideas
about the world in the post Soviet space countries
such as Belarus Ukraine or Moldova, which I uh
researched. Um Yeah, and then, then we get to
the point. OK. So are the civil civil society
organizations? Can we, can we always assume that these
organizations within society would promote democracy not necessarily, right?
Because if the status quo is not democracy and
these organizations are conservative, they want to preserve the
status quo. It means we are not gonna gonna
move towards more democratic, open inclusive society.
Mhm No, you know, I for me, this is
a very interesting topic. Uh AND I mentioned earlier,
for example, bigger cities and a more atomized society
because I guess that in this particular case, what
I were, what I was referring to was not
just the fact of people in particular situations, perhaps
not wanting to engage with society, with politics anymore
because of their particular situation, but also how the
particular political, economic and social context leads people to
those kinds of situations. Like for example, one thing
that I'm very interested in in is the phenomenon
of Hikikomori in Japan. That is the so-called shut
ins. That is something that went up or became
a more, more of a phenomenon after the economic
crisis in the late eighties where people were used
to just go uh complete their university degrees and
then get us accepted into one of the leading
companies in Japan and be there for life. I
mean, completely stable jobs, no job insecurity, good economic
pros prospects, the prospect of building a family and
all of that. And then suddenly they lost that.
And now there's 1 million plus people in Japan
that just withdraw from society. They live at home
in their room and they just say that they
want, they don't want win with society anymore. They,
they don't want to engage with people anymore. They
are perhaps on the internet, but that's uh the
most they get from even if we can call
them social interaction. And also sometimes I uh watch
videos that some people make with homeless people in
the US. And some of them also mentioned more
or less the same. They say look, I'm, I'm
done with society. I'm done with politics. I don't
care anymore. So, uh, I mean, it's a, it's
a very sad situation but it's also, I guess,
uh, a symptom and a manifestation many times of
how, being economically, politically and socially disenfranchised where that
leads people or can lead people.
Yes, for sure. And I think, um, economic safety
is also in a way a precondition for active
participation in politics. Right. So, yes, there are situations
where those who are disadvantaged actually stand up and
protest, usually it is led actually by those who
have more capacity to do so uh that also,
you know, involves, I don't know, maybe the the
uh suffrage rights for, for women, right? When, when
you had these women that started, that were be
better off, that started mobilizing the interest. But also
uh even when you think about the Marxist revolutions,
right? This was the elites that drove actually the
uh action for the rights of the workers. So
the workers were too busy working, right? Or uh
when you think about people who are in very
grave uh uh economic situation, they don't have time
to simply come out to the streets and uh
you know, engage with this uh with this. Yeah,
political processes, they also, of course, can be completely
disenchanted and think it doesn't matter, you know. Uh
FIRST there was uh Gorbachev, then there was Yeltsin,
then there was putting nothing changes in my life.
Why would I ever actually participate in politics. It
doesn't affect me directly. This is also very dangerous,
of course, because then, um you know, you might
end up with a regime that uh uses violence
uh in your name, but you do not uh
identify with that, right? So this is what many
Russians are probably facing at the moment because a
lot of the society was completely dis dis attached
from politics. They thought this is none of their
business politics is for politicians. Real life is for
for normal citizens. But at some point, you then
end up in a situation when your government is
taking decisions in your name that uh that are
horrible, right? Uh But in the end, it is
about this ability to participate in politics and you
can only do it when you have some sort
of well being. So it is not for nothing
that we have this ongoing debate. Does economic development
come first or democracy come first, right? What, what
should, what should we achieve first to actually um
yeah, better the lives of more people. Uh And
then, yeah, your example with, with the US and
the homeless people, this also shows that, you know,
the social democracies that actually provide the safety nets
might encourage more political participation just purely because they
give more people the capacity to participate in politics.
Uh And I think if, if we uh kind
of trace the development also within, within Europe, of
different countries. You can see that, right, that there
is more engagement even if we just look purely
at um how many people vote. So the turnout
numbers um for elections that this comes with also
uh the, the, the functioning welfare state in the
end.
Yeah. And I guess that this is also probably
one of the reasons why when there are revolutions,
it's usually a middle class people leading them because
they have at least enough stability to be able
to devote resources into that kind of level of
political participation. Exactly.
Yeah, they can afford it simply. Yeah.
Yeah. And so we were talking about civil society
here. Uh But on the other hand, we also
have external actors. So what are external actors? And
by the way, what is the interplay here between
civil society and external actors?
Um SO there can be different types of external
actors and external meaning, you know, this is not
an actor that necessarily is vested within some domestic
policy sphere, right? Um And for the actor that
I looked the most at was the European Union
and Russia as different well uh entities. So one
is an organization of states, the other one is
a state that actually try to promote their interests
in other countries, right? So they enact particular uh
strategies or policies outside of the boundaries of this
organization of their or their own state. And one
of the examples was exactly this uh uh civil
society actors that promote particular uh conservative Russian orthodox
uh Russian speakers values in the what Russia calls.
Uh And this is also uh uh not uh
approved by the countries themselves, of course, but the
Russia course they're near abroad um kind of diminishing
the the agency and sovereignty of the States in
their neighborhood. Um And then what is the neighborhood,
the Eastern neighborhoods of the European Union? So the
European Union calls it the Eastern Partnership countries, right?
So this would be two actors that have some
sort of state formal organization, uh they are external,
but there can also be external actors or perceived
as external. Um THAT we all know also uh
from all the literature on globalization such as international,
non governmental organizations, right? So it could be, I
don't know, Amnesty International um uh MS F so
doctors without borders, right? These are also external actors
that can come to another country and provide services,
promote some values, um protect some rights. Uh It
could even be, of course uh uh environmental organizations
such as uh World Wildlife Fund, for example, right.
So these are external actors.
Uh And so I would like to get now
into the topic of legitimacy, but just before that,
we've been focusing a lot on democracies here. But
what are hybrid regimes?
Well, hybrid regimes are regimes that combine elements of
democracy and authoritarianism. Again, this is a very kind
of uh shadow sphere of uh regime classification, right?
So it's very difficult to determine when one regime
is still a democracy and not yet authoritarian. And
then when they are really consolidated authoritarian regime and
uh regimes such as Russia somewhere mm between the
end of the 19 nineties and the beginning of
two thousands were often referred to as hybrid regimes.
Also Venezuela of uh Hugo Chavez was classified as
a hybrid regime. And this is because the uh
the regime still kept elections they kept or the,
you know, the those who ruled this regime, they
kept elections, they kept organizing them. There was some
contestation, although increasingly limited and there was still some
pluralism in the public sphere in terms of the
media. So there were constraints on these checks and
balances like the media and the organization of uh
political parties, for example, but it was still much
more pluralistic than in what we understand as a
classical authoritarian regime or dictatorial regime where you just
have one party or one ruler that dictates everything
by, by the way, in, in the particular case
of Venezuela. Now with Maduro in power, is it
still classified as a hybrid regime?
I think now it's already classified as authoritarian regime.
I again, as I say, this is a very
difficult situation to uh to know where exactly the
tipping point is something that we still have to
uh to determine. But I think uh the best
way to check that is to look at uh
research of uh v varieties of democracies who monitor
over time the changes in the regime. So then
you can actually determine where the, the, the tipping
point happen, right?
Uh By the way, I, I'm not sure if
you were going to say something else when I
interrupted you to ask you about uh the regime
in Venezuela or
no, I think uh I think that's, that's all
right. Well, what, what we did uh also in,
in this one of the, the research uh comparative
research pieces that uh we conducted was to compare
the legitimation strategies of uh different leaders who had
authoritarian tendencies such as uh so in hybrid regimes,
Putin uh and uh Chavez but also the leaders,
the political party in Sela, so completely different regimes.
And uh uh as we discussed before, they all
use democratic arguments, they just use different ones, right?
So they, they use very similar legitimation strategies. They
just uh fill in the content of the strategies
with the, with the context of their own country
basically. So whatever fits to actually give them more,
more power, but still present them in a positive
light.
OK. So talking about those legitimation strategies, how is
political legitimacy established?
Exactly. Well, again, uh very very contested idea. Um
AND it depends whom you would ask. So I
think legal scholars would just say, well, when there
are laws and laws are being followed, followed, then
we have legitimacy, right? Um But uh as you
probably already noticed, I am uh someone who is
more interested in how citizens make sense of uh
political reality uh and how they evaluate it. And
I think in that uh when, when we take
that perspective, then legitimacy is uh we can only
talk about perceived legitimacy and legitimacy in a particular
context. Um So we cannot have one definition of
legitimacy. What we can say is that legitimacy is
to perceive someone as having the right to take
decisions for us, right? So authority that can can,
can make decisions for us without the violence. So
if we add violence to this, then, well, can
we call it legitimate? Right? If you feel forced,
if you say, oh, I disagree with this authority
and the consequence of that is that they put
me in jail or they decapitate me, well, then
it doesn't seem very legitimate. So it has to
be a kind of voluntary transfer of power to
an authority. And then um there will be factors
that are more universal that affect it. But the
specificities of how these factors are being filled in,
let's say will be contextual. Um And this can,
the context might mean, you know, some social cultural
norms or uh even, you know, who is in
the majority, who is in the minority currently in,
in society whose interests are represented and who's not.
But in general, um building on my research and
the research of that. That was done before, I
would say that legitimacy is established through fairness and
fairness in terms of distribution of resources. So perceived
fairness again, right. That's why it will be contextual
uh perceived distribution of resources, uh perceived uh fairness
of procedures being applied. And here we would by
that, we would mean um applying the same rules
to uh all citizens, including politicians. Um And in
the end also, of course, uh receiving some personal
benefits from the political system that we have uh
should be there. Because if you never get anything,
why would you contribute anything to that system? Right.
So if you feel like, well, I'm, I'm always
losing, I never get anything. Uh I'm always excluded
from the policies that are being established. Why would
I grant legitimacy to these authorities?
And are there different kinds of legitimation strategies?
Yes, for sure. So, um they will differ probably
somewhat between the the regimes, right? So authoritarian regimes
might use different strategies than democracies. Although there is
also a lot of overlap. But if you think
about authoritarian regimes, um strategies very often they find
an enemy, right? So an enemy makes uh makes
the need for everybody to rally around the flag
and support the leaders. And then we might grant
more legitimacy to that leader because we feel like
they will protect us. And this, this is also
something, by the way, we would find among this
hunter gatherer societies that when there is a threat,
um there is more power granted to the leader.
The thing is that they very quickly after the
conflict is resolved or after, you know, the uh
the battle uh is, is over, they very quickly
bring the leader down. So he's again kind of
leveled, uh you know, and he's one of one
of them rather than above them, which is not
necessarily how it works in uh in current mass
societies and mass politics. So that would be one
legitimation strategy, another legitimation strategy would be um economic
performance. So emphasizing how good the government or the
leaders, the leadership is doing in terms of the
economy, it can be job creation and then unemployment
uh uh limiting uh it can be foreign investment
uh uh uh that comes into the country. Sorry,
I'm, I'm a bit lost for words. Uh So
attracting foreign investment, that would be something that uh
uh also Asian countries very often use as their
um legitimation strategies. Uh It could be also in
the end, no fairness of distribution. So as I
said, I find that citizens perceive it as something
that is very important to grant legitimacy. So when
the government can explain why the resources are being
uh distributed in a particular way, and they can
make a good argument that this is a fair
distribution and it is beneficial for the society. Uh
THEN that could also be uh a legitimation strategy.
So not only economic growth but also how the
resources are being distributed.
You know, I'm very fond of smaller scale societies.
And it's interesting to know that, uh you've looked
into some enter gatherers because, uh, uh I really
like reading ethnography and work on smaller scale societies
because, uh unless the leaders uh are able and
that's already in uh bigger scale or somewhat bigger
scale societies, unless they're able to accumulate enough wealth
and resources and people around to control people in
smaller scale societies usually do not put up with
nonsense, with abuse of power, with bullies nor anyone
like that.
No. Exactly, exactly. That's why no underperform leaders are
very easily removed in this uh in this situation.
And we don't have such a direct mechanism in
our politics. It takes usually a while and sometimes
it takes so long that it's very difficult to
remove them again, right. So uh this is the
difference between this direct kind of interactions, political interactions
and indirect ones.
So that's about political legitimacy. But then another concept
is political capacity. So what is political capacity and
does political legitimacy matter for political capacity?
So political capacity um is the ability to actually
enforce decisions, right? So if you are governing you,
well, you would hope that you can actually do
something and if you have the power, you can
do something with that power and you can achieve
uh achieve some policy outcomes. So why legitimacy matters
often is because if you, if you decide that
this is the law in the country now and
nobody follows it. This means that this was futile
that actually uh you know, your political capacity is
non existent because nobody complies with the decisions you
are taking or the the laws that you are
trying to implement. Um And uh a funny, funny
example of that and this is in a functioning
democracy, still functioning democracy is that uh we have
uh a ban on particular fireworks in the Netherlands.
And this is a state policy so that uh
there is, you know, the state can take such
a decision, they have the capacity to do so
it was agreed, it was uh announced uh yet
nobody or many, many people do not comply with
that decision. So it means that particular decision at
least is not being perceived as legitimate, right? Uh
So people,
by, by the way, let me just ask you
was that decision made on the grounds of I
don't know environmental risks or what?
Yeah. So there are of course many things that
can be said that are wrong with uh fireworks.
But uh one of the things is of course
this unnecessary stress to, to animals that are that
they are experiencing. The other one is the amount
of accidents that is happening. So on humans, right?
So uh there is just basically increased capacity of
the hospitals needed for that period because people are
losing their eyes and you know, uh are being
harmed by the fireworks. Um And also, um and
that is a little bit of a of a
of the culture of the Netherlands and the, the
particularity of society here this night of the New
Year's is uh is the night when a lot
of uh loss of conduct are kind of thrown
out of the window and there is a lot
of uh fights happening, right? So it also requires
additional police capacity to actually put down some riots
and unnecessary vandalism. And um so in the end,
there were very many different reasons uh to do
that. Uh And I guess these are good arguments
but you can also have an argument. Well, we
as the Dutch people, we like to celebrate in
this way and the government has no right to
tell us that we cannot do so. So on,
on one hand, you know, you have the government
issuing a decision. On the other hand, you have
the population saying, well, we, yeah, you can issue
it but we don't recognize it. And this is
exactly when then the political capacity is meaningless, right?
Because you, yeah, without actually the uh legitimacy granted
to that decision. Uh YEAH, nothing changes.
Mhm And uh this is the way in which
governments respond to disasters affect their legitimacy.
Um I think in the same way as generally,
uh legitimacy is being generated. So I know that
you're referring now, to a very specific uh paper
that I have with Florian Van Leeuwen, where we
used an experiment in different countries. Uh If I
remember correctly, five or six different countries um uh
in which we manipulated the situation of flooding and
how the government responds to it. And in that
particular experiment, the government could uh either help uh
fairly to everybody who was affected or they could
just help some people only, right, where it created
disparity in uh in the sense that not all
those who were in need uh were given some
help. Uh THE government in that scenario could also
either uh involve citizens in decision making. So kind
of uh survey what is needed and get into
the discussion with uh the people that were affected
or just ignore their request to uh to have
this discussion. And then uh what we also manipulated
in that particular scenario was whether people got something
personally or not, right? Because not everybody was actually
affected. And what you could also manipulate in this
scenario is that you either got something or not.
And then uh um in the end, what we
find is that the strongest effect on perceived legitimacy.
So whether you, you like this government and you
wanna grant them power was the distributive justice. So
whether the uh resources were fairly distributed across those
who were in need and uh in that sense,
I think it's, yeah, it, it, when we confront
it with you know, reality and we think about
the ecological validity, validity, it does make sense, right?
So, distributive fairness as the main factor, the uh
procedural fairness also matters. This is again a very
contested effect because some uh some studies show that
yeah procedure of mm fairness. So whether you follow
the the same procedures uh in similar situations and
apply the same rules to uh to different people,
these effects are varying depending on the context. Sometimes
it seems like, you know, for example, we like
a referendum as a procedure when we know that
we win it, right? But that's not really a
big commitment. Um And there are also other studies
that show that maybe this procedural fairness is very
contextual and when it matters, depends on what situation
we are um analyzing. But here this engagement of
citizens. So the scenario in which the citizens were
having the right to say, well, we need this
and this help is uh uh is what is
required now from the government that increased also the
perceived legitimacy.
So now that we've covered legitimacy, let's get into
the hot topic of our conversation today. That is
the, the European, the European Union. So
we talked a little bit already about the eu
as an ex. Uh
Yes, but, but there are some questions here that
probably many people are interested in seeing uh addressed
and not list perhaps the B and like that.
So uh but uh getting into that. Uh I
would like to ask you about another concept that
then we can apply to the European Union specifically.
What is regulatory governance and how much of it
do we have in the European Union?
So I will try to be short and concise
now. Uh We have a lot of it because
regulatory governance is uh basically everything that the European
Commission is trying to do uh with their uh
with their specialized agencies. And there are many of
them right, in different sectors of uh uh of
politics and society. Um So if you think about
the E MA, the European medicine agency, this is
regulatory governance. If there is a deci decision or
uh uh a regulation issued by such an agency
like about vaccines, this is regulatory uh regulatory power
of the European Union. Uh If you have issues
decisions about the safety of particular products or the
safety of particular materials, like, you know, what can
be in plastic bottles for uh for Children, for
babies feeding. This is regulatory governance of the eu.
So there is really a lot of it. Um
And yeah, I think despite the fact that there
is a lot of it, we know very little
about it because it's kind of happening in this
technocratic space of decision making.
Mhm
uh
But uh sort of related to that. Um ARE
there any legitimacy concerns here when it comes to
the European Union? Is there for example, enough respect
for national sovereignty because you hear that argument uh
as I mentioned, from people who supported Brexit, but
also sometimes from other political parties in other political
countries across the European Union that are not very
fond of remaining in the European Union. So what
are your thoughts on that?
Uh I think there are two important things. So
there is the, the uh the European Union is
of course a complex uh supranational organization, right? So
it doesn't only have the the European Commission which
is a technocratic body. It also has the European
Council that includes the governments of all the countries
that are members of the European Union and the
decision making is different. Also the delegation of power
is different. So the problem of the European Commission
is that they are not elected, right? These are
experts uh that advise on particular policies or regulations
and that's where we come back to our definition
of, you know, what is democracy and what is
the role of uh different elements of democracy? You
clearly do not delegate power through voting to the
European Commission. So if you think that democratic governance
can only be achieved through voting and not through
competence, which the European Commission's uh authority is based
on, then we have a problem of legitimacy. Now,
the question is, can we delegate authority or legitimacy
only on the basis of voting or are we
OK that some decisions and some regulations are established
by experts. That's basically the, the kind of dilemma
that we are dealing with. And then um yeah,
what does it mean for the National sovereignty? So
the European Commission can um can take different decisions
if it's a decision, it has to be implemented.
Um But they also issue recommendations um and recommendations
can be either taken up or rejected, right? Um
And there is uh another type of decision making
that now skips my mind, but the one that,
oh, it's a directive, the one that uh specifies
what is the, the goal, uh but doesn't show
the path towards achieving that goal, right? So that
is in the discretion of the, of the states
themselves. So again, it depends really on, about which
decisions we are talking about how much they might
potentially infringe on the sovereignty or national sovereignty. Now
again, we can go back to the treaties and
think about, ok, if you join this organization, what
does that mean for your sovereignty? And this is
all specified in the Treaties of the European Union
and in particular policy aspects, um such as the
ones that have to do with the common market.
We agreed that we will have synchronization of rules,
right? So that our standards are the same and
that our rules are the same for all the
members of the European Union. There are other um
policy domains that are not affected like that because
they are not the core policies of the European
Union and here much more discretion is in the
hands of the States or actually there is no
uh no European power over these issues, very little
European power, for example, is over foreign policies of
uh of specific countries, right? So uh you for
sure know that uh even in the times of
very um pressing security crisis, we are having uh
still a lot of opposition towards creating common European
security uh structures. So we, we have some of
the beginnings of this policy. But for example, uh
for many countries, it is unimaginable to have the
European army, right? So a lot of these issues
are still really in the hands of the States
themselves. Um And then there is, of course, also
the compliance. So for example, the European Union can
say, well, you should not use that particular component
uh in the plastic bottles for babies. And then
still multiple countries in the eu can say, well,
our uh uh so this would be something that
the European Commission is issuing us advice our uh
state or domestic authority that specializes in this states
otherwise. Um SO we either do it or we
don't do it right. So the eu can say
it's safe and then France can can say, well,
we ban it anyway. And this happens very often.
And so just looking beyond the sort of narratives
that we many times hear from particularly political parties
that want for their countries to leave the European
Union and some of the concerns they express that
sometimes, I mean, it's, we, we have to take
it with a big grain of salt because many
times they just want to leverage their political power
and so on, they just thinking about their own
political interests. But uh do we have good enough
data on uh to what extent uh the average
European Union citizen considers the European Union itself legitimate
or not,
this varies a lot across the different countries. So
I think in general, there is no huge legitimacy
crisis. Um So even in countries that are maybe
a little bit more skeptical towards the eu, often
the citizens are even more skeptical towards their domestic
governments here. For example, I'm talking about Slovakia, right?
So the, the question is what, what is the
concerning level of legitimacy and then what, what, what
should worry us. Um So I think the main
problem of the relation between the citizens and the
eu is that citizens know very little about the
eu. So they know still maybe not a huge
amount, but they know a lot about their domestic
politics and the eu politics is so far removed
from them that it is very difficult for an
average citizen to evaluate uh you know, how good
or bad it is for them. And therefore these
manipulations from, you know, the strategic politicians might be
even more effective. Uh When you talk about the
European politics because there is even less, we we
have even less tools to check it. Uh So
nobody is gonna read these regulations that are concerning
particular um you know, elements of plastic bottles or
uh who, which citizen is actually going to look
at uh the reports about the safety of a
new vaccine that the uh E MA is uh
is issuing. Right? So in Denmark, for example, I
don't know if you remember this, but when astrazeneca
was was contested because of some potential side effects,
the eu the European Commission issued a recommendation that
it is safe. But already the domestic kind of
debate steered the citizens also against astrazeneca and it
was ultimately banned. Although probably uh on a large
scale, this was the the vaccine that saved the
most lives because of the state in which it
was approved and introduced, right? So you see that
it's very difficult, well, even for experts to know
what to do, but then imagine an an average
citizen like where, where do they pick up their
information from? And how could they know uh what's
the right thing to do here?
Mhm. Uh WHICH is uh I, I mean, politics,
of course uh is a very complicated issue also
because private citizens have their own lives, their work,
their private lives and so on. And so it's
very hard and demanding for uh individuals to keep
up to date, even with their own national politics.
And everything that's happening and even less so with
something that happens at a super national level like
the European Union and then also probably in schools,
people also do not learn enough about uh the
the different uh institutions that operate in the European
Union, the powers they are granted what they are
able to do or not. So uh I mean,
it's understandable, at least to some extent white people,
particularly when they are going through some economic political,
social issues would uh feel uh like supporting parties
that promote narratives against the European Union.
Yeah, for sure. So this research that we are
doing and this is with uh Davila Rinco again
from uh Leon University on agencies, right on, on
the European Commission's agencies uh even for us just
to understand this uh these decisions of even one
agency. And then imagine the entire scope of, of
different technocratic decisions that are being made. It's just
very, very complicated. Um So for citizens, it is
impossible to get direct information about it. Uh If
they are even uh you know, very interested, it
will be difficult to process what is being, being
published. But then again, when we actually do experiments
and we uh manipulate how decisions are being made.
And for example, we show uh the citizens that
the agency is taking the decision on the basis
of this scientific grounds. And we did it with
um for example, an issue that citizens could care
about which is a safety of, uh, of dried
meat. So when you dry meat, uh, when you
know what kind of recommendations we have so that
we can keep it safe and that you don't
get basically food poisoning when you go and eat
it in a restaurant. So when we show citizens,
uh, the, you know, the expertise, actually, they are
very responsive to that and they support this kind
of decision making, they would approve a decision that
is based on merit, right? So then it seems
like the legitimacy is not being harmed. But there
is this one thing that we are missing in,
in this chain is actually getting that information to
citizens, right? That they know that there is uh
some expert that cares about their well being and
therefore they conduct proper scientific investigation about, you know,
under what conditions shall we store and prepare this
uh this meat so that when we go out
to a restaurant or when we do it ourselves,
we don't get food poisoning and that step is
missing. So that's, I think the, the trickiest thing
uh for, for the eu to gain legitimacy.
And uh before we move on to the last
topic of our conversation today, uh how does the
eu deal with potential public backlash?
Mm That's again a very, very uh long topic
actually. Uh BUT maybe, maybe, maybe not, maybe they
have very limited tools to do. So I think
that's the uh the first answer that I, I
could give you. So when we, when we think
about, mm Well, so what, what would, what would
be public backlash? So one thing is of course,
uh what you refer to in terms of Brexit,
that you have politicians that manipulate particular information and
then steer citizens against the eu. So that's 11
thing uh what's I investigated together? And this is
actually a project led by Dmitry Toshkov is the
backlash of citizens uh towards the eu punishing their
own country because of violations that the the government
is committing, right? And this is the specific case
of Poland that we focused on. But you could
also imagine uh other countries that are violating the
treaties by uh basically breaking democratic rules, uh which
happened in not only Poland, of course, we know
uh that this kind of violations happened in Hungary.
Uh THERE are to some limited extent happening in
Austria and Slovakia. So in multiple countries um in
the EU, however, the EU or the European Commission
has not been taking a lot of action against
that. Uh Poland was actually the first case where
the European Commission and also the European Court of
Justice started issuing decisions but also implementing punishment. So
uh that was something that uh was unprecedented that
uh the Polish government was punished with 1 million
per day uh for installing um an institution that
was basically sort of censoring the judges in the
country, right? So it was uh a, a kind
of uh a control uh ins uh yeah, institution
for what kind of decisions judges are making. And
this is clearly against the independence of uh, of
judges, which is an element of the Treaties of
the European Union. You have to comply with, uh,
with that to be a member. But until this
kind of violations happened, the eu did not really
have any tools to respond to such developments. And
now the question is that you're asking, well, how
do citizens then respond to that? Right. Uh So
if the EU is punishing their own country with
here, actually very substantial financial punishments um by implementing
infringement procedure, then what what do citizens make of
it? Well, again, the problem of the EU is
that citizens mostly don't know. So this was one
of our main findings that citizens had no idea
that this was the, the sum that the EU
was imposing on, on the government. There was of
course, later, also the discussion of the blocking of
particular funds uh for Poland. But this was the,
the first uh infringement procedure that, that had this
1 million per day punishment. Um And what we
found out is that there is very little that
you can do to actually convince citizens uh that
this punishment is either right or wrong. So they
kind of already predetermined their idea about it on
the basis of their political attachment. And uh so
the political identity, you know, whether you are in
general pro European or anti European, this already uh
accounts for most of the decision making in terms
of, do you support such a uh such a
punishment or not the only thing that we found
in, in our experiment? And again, this is very
new preliminary finding and it needs to be replicated
and we need to study it in more context.
But perhaps there is some truth to it is
that um and basically manipulating the social norm, so
the norm prevalence increases support for uh for punishing
these violations of the rule of law, right? Because
that was uh this court's problem was the violation
of the rule of law. And then if citizens
were presented with the information, factual information that most
citizens in their society are uh supporting the rule
of law, they think it's important that the judges
are independent, etcetera, etcetera. If you created this feeling
of majority norm support, then that increased your personal
uh support for uh the punishment that the Eu
or the European Commission installed on Poland.
And by the way, do you think that there
are, there are any uh I wouldn't even say
easy but good solutions to deal with this sort
of uh gap that we see between uh public
knowledge about the eu how its different agencies and
institutions work, its political legitimacy and so on. Uh
AND basically, I guess support for the eu and
its policies and so on.
I wish I knew, I really don't know if
there are any, any solutions and if they are,
they are not simple because we are just also
dealing with human interests and human limitations, right? So
how do you get to that stage that people
are actually interested in politics? So we actually make
all people interested in politics because another thing that
we find consistently is that those who are really
invested in political game are the most polarized. And
you know, are the the ones that are responsible
for most of the conflict as well. And maybe
even deterioration of uh political systems. So, you know,
there are, there are different things that we need
to consider when we uh we wanna, yeah, think
about the engagement in general. We believe that engaged
citizens are a good thing. And if we believe
that then there has to be some kind of
easy way of translating this abstract policies into citizens
lives. Um So one of the things I observed
when I was doing some research in Belarus, for
example, was that where the presence of the EU
is completely limited, right? But the EU is still
engaging uh in Belarus, they had uh at the
bus stop screens with information, what can the EU
do for you? Right. So very directly trying to
speak to the citizen and what, what can they
get uh from, from the eu um So maybe
this is like a hint of what could be
done in terms of translating this presence of the
eu into citizens lives. And I think one of
the recent findings also and this is maybe relating
to Brexit and you know, this this backlash against
the eu uh in terms of Brexit is that
um negative campaigning is not always what drives citizens,
but we need more positive uh emotions or positive
campaigning in politics. Uh So there are some hints
that the uh brexiters want because they basically said
we will make the NHS work for you, right?
It's sort of like the Belarus. Uh WHAT can
the EU do for you? And now it is
actually just wasting our resources on uh on the
EU. But what we would do is we are
going to bring the N NHS to you now
and we are gonna put it at a higher
level. Um And maybe that worked more than the
negative campaigning. Whereas the campaign of the anti brexiters
was mostly based on fear of Brexit, right? So
not what's uh staying in the eu should bring
to you, but what leaving the eu will take
away and what is the fear and the chaos,
all these complex things that citizens also don't understand.
So, talking about the common market uh workings rather
than actually OK, tangibly, what does it mean uh
for me and what does it bring to me?
So, in terms of positive outcomes. So I, I
don't have research on that and this is more
from, you know, reading, uh, of others work that
these are the things perhaps that could work. Um,
BUT there is really plenty of, uh, of things
that we need to learn first to know whether
this is applicable at all.
Mhm. So, let's get into the last topic here
today then. Um, I would like to ask you
a little bit about international humanitarian interventions because you've
also done a bit of work on that. And
uh it's always a relevant topic but perhaps even
more relevant in the current uh international political context.
So uh this domestic public support matter when it
comes to these kinds of interventions.
Uh I would like to believe, yes, when we
talk about democracies, right? So in general, mm democratic
governments are more constrained by public opinion than authoritarian
governments. So they should listen to some extent also
to what the public thinks uh because of their
electoral gains and losses that come with it. Um
So you would think that they pay attention. So
it means that uh not normative, whether we should
intervene or not, that's not something that I'm discussing.
But it means that in principle, um what citizens
think should be relevant to the government's taking decisions
including about uh an intervention in a foreign country.
What we found in our studies is that it's
very difficult to actually manipulate the context in which
citizens would support an intervention or to increase it
because the general level when there are atrocities happening
and this is in terms of humanitarian kind of
intervention, right? Not to go and gain resources or
you know, drill some oil somewhere. It's really about
when the domestic government is uh persecuting uh killing
or threatening with genocide, uh their population. And basically,
there is no other way to protect them than
if someone else comes in. So these are the
situations we are talking about. So in general, people
already make their mind up and uh they are
quite supportive of that. So if this is the
the kind of criteria that we set, this is
a humanitarian intervention, this is the goal to protect
the population from uh from being killed, then then
people are quite supportive. Um BUT we found um
increases the the chances of an individual to support
such an intervention uh and how it is being
intervened. So whether in a military way or, you
know, with humanitarian aid depends on uh some personal
preferences in terms of uh militarism. So how militaristic
are you? Right. So if you actually think that
the armies could solve problems or you think that
they cannot. Um SO the more militaristic, you are,
the more likely you would support an armed intervention.
If you are less militaristic, then you would support
more humanitarian action. Chances of success is something that
people consider as well. But it's very difficult to
operationalize chance of success because what do you mean
by success? Right. And different scholars try to study,
for example, the numbers of saved people or prevented
casualties, some sort of losses and gains operationalization. But
it is very difficult to tap into the exact
effect. So, you know, if we save hundreds of
people, does it matter more than or do we
support it more than when we save thousands of
people? Does it matter? What kind of people we
are going to save? Are they Democrats or non
Democrats? These kind of things have been studied small
effects. Um IN general, I think we have similar
tendencies uh as in other contexts to uh feel
more supportive of people who are more like us.
Um But the effects are very small. And then
the last thing that we found also is and
this is in a newer study with uh Eamon
Eloy and also Natalia Kalo, we manipulated the legality
in terms of the UN approval of such an
intervention. And uh we found out that um when
we have three conditions, so in one condition, we
have illegal intervention. So the uh uh Un Security
Council doesn't unanimously improve uh versus neutral. So we
don't have information about the uh UN approval and
versus then finally, the legality, so unanimous approval, the
legality actually increases support for such an intervention. The
thing is that there is no difference between the
neutral condition and illegal condition which kind of suggest
to us that people know or have this mm
you know, kind of intuition that most of these
interventions would be blocked and would be illegal in
um uh in terms of the UN approval, which
is also true, right? Because uh it's always either
China or Russia blocking it or the Western countries
uh blocking an intervention depending on what we are,
what intervention we are talking about. So to achieve
actually unanimous decision of the Un Security Council is
almost impossible nowadays. So the default is actually illegal
uh intervention. But basically signaling again, we have a
consensus about it increases people's um support for such
an intervention.
So would you like to uh just before we
go, would you like to tell us about the
sort of work you're doing? Now? What topics are
you going to explore in the near future?
So that's uh very exciting because I'm uh moving
forward with this analysis of anthropological records uh of
hunter gatherers to find out when do they grant
power to authorities and when do they constrain it?
Uh So this is like the the first building
block of them taking it further and testing whether
the same kind of intuitions are still present in
our modern minds. So I would like to further
focus on, you know, which checks and balances we
find the most intuitive. And then I I am
developing uh some experimental work to test this effects.
Of course, depending also on funding because that's the
main limitation always for us as scholars uh to
have someone fund your ideas. But uh that's the
direction that I wanna go into. And I wanna
focus mostly on this uh intuitive responses to um
violation of uh checks and balances, different checks and
balances, but also the uh intuitive granting of power.
So when do you want to grant power to
authorities? Uh AND I play a little bit with
the ideas also uh that is in the liter
that are in the literature on leadership, you know,
to what extent does competence uh matter to what
extent um some other traits uh play a role
such as warmth. And this trend of studies actually
uh started also with uh with me being involved
in a project uh recently in Ukraine. So 11
of the things uh I wanna elaborate on is
to know when people grant legitimacy or power to
leaders and when they constrain it. And uh the
recent example of such a study is a study
we conducted with Lasse Austen Henrique Barto, Ovis, Florian,
Van Leuven and Mark Van Fu uh from the
Fryers in Amsterdam. Um The study was conducted in
Ukraine. So in the context of war, and we
wanted to know whether the war changes the preferences
for trade, we value in leaders and to our
best knowledge. This is the first study where um
we actually talked to citizens that were experiencing war
So we have conducted the study in the first
two weeks uh of the Russian invasion uh on
Ukraine. Um And what we did is we actually
assigned participants to different conditions. One was just the
situation now. So we asked them to think about
the situation now and whether uh and what kind
of traits they would like to see in the
leader if they needed to elect one now, which
for them meant in times, in the times of
war. Uh And in the other condition, participants were
randomly asked to imagine that uh the peace has
returned to their country and that they are about
to elect uh uh uh a new, new leader
again. And what kind of traits would they like
to see in them? And what we see is
that while in the war condition, the preference for
dominance is higher, once people think about the peaceful
conditions, so return to normal democratic, peaceful reality, the
dominance uh trade is being less preferred. So it
actually goes back to a lower preference for dominance.
And still even in the condition of war, uh
citizens of Ukraine preferred the uh warmth and competence
of the leader much more over the dominance. So,
although you see this shift in how much dominance
we want when we experience war, uh we still
value the other traits more, right? So the competence
and uh and the warmth. Uh SO this is
the the the findings that we have and we
hope that uh soon we will share also the
results in the in the publication.
Great. And if people are interested, where can they
find you and your work on the internet?
Well, they can find me at the website of
the University of Amsterdam. Uh And of course, there
is also Google scholar. So feel, feel free to
browse through the publications. Uh I strive to have
all my publications uh available open access. And uh
if they are not published and they are uh
in journals, then they are published at the OS
F platform. So uh people can just uh freely
access them and yeah, hopefully enjoy.
Great. So, Doctor Maze, thank you so much again
for taking the time to come on the show.
It was really fun to talk to you and
hopefully uh I will have you again in the
future somewhere in the future because I really want
to talk to you about the studies or the
work you doing on those and other societies because
it's an ongoing topic on my channel. So excellent.
Thank you so much Ricardo. This was great. Uh
It was a fun uh and hopefully also informative
chat. Uh And I look forward to connecting again.
Hi guys. Thank you for watching this interview. Until
the end. If you liked it, please share it.
Leave a like and hit the subscription button. The
show is brought to you by the N Lights
Learning and Development. Then differently check the website at
N lights.com and also please consider supporting the show
on Patreon or paypal. I would also like to
give a huge thank you to my main patrons
and paypal supporters, Perera Larson, Jerry Muller and Frederick
Suno Bernard Seche O of Alex Adam, Castle Matthew
Whitten Bear. No wolf, Tim Ho Erica LJ Condors
Philip Forrest Connelly. Then the Met Robert Wine in
NAI Z Mark Nevs calling in Holbrook Field, Governor
Mikel Stormer Samuel Andre Francis for Agns Ferus and
H her meal and Lain Jung Y and the
K Hes Mark Smith J Tom Hummel S Friends,
David Sloan Wilson Yasa, dear, Ro Ro Diego, Jan
Punter Romani Charlotte, Bli Nicole Barba Adam hunt Pavlo
Stassi na Me, Gary G Alman, Sam of Zal
Ari and YPJ Barboza Julian Price Edward Hall Eden
Broner Douglas Fry Franca Beto Lati Cortez or Solis.
Scott Zachary FTD and W Daniel Friedman, William Buckner,
Paul Giorgio, Luke Loki, Georgio Theophano Chris Williams and
Peter Wo David Williams, the Ausa Anton Erickson Charles
Murray, Alex Shaw, Marie Martinez, Coralie Chevalier, Bangalore Larry
Dey junior, Old Ebon Starry Michael Bailey then spur
by Robert Grassy Zorn, Jeff mcmahon, Jake Zul Barnabas
Radick, Mark Kempel, Thomas Dvor Luke Neeson, Chris Tory
Kimberley Johnson, Benjamin Gilbert Jessica. No Week, Linda Brendan
Nicholas Carlson, Ismael Bensley Man, George Katis, Valentine Steinman,
Perras, Kate Van Goler, Alexander Abert Liam Dan Biar
Masoud Ali Mohammadi Perpendicular Jer Urla. Good enough Gregory
Hastings. David Pins of Sean Nelson, Mike Levin and
Jos Net. A special thanks to my producers is
our web, Jim Frank Luca Stein, Tom Veg and
Bernard N Corti Dixon, Bendik Muller Thomas Trumble, Catherine
and Patrick Tobin, John Carl Negro, Nick Ortiz and
Nick Golden. And to my executive producers, Matthew Lavender,
Si Adrian Bogdan Knits and Rosie. Thank you for
all.